DOCUMENT: Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (Act No. 46 of 2023)
ACT NAME: Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (BNSS)
CATEGORY: criminal_procedure
JURISDICTION: India
YEAR: 2023

CHAPTER I: PRELIMINARY
Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement.
(1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of July, 2024.
(3) It replaces the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC).

Section 2. Definitions.
(1)(g) "cognizable offence" means an offence for which, and "cognizable case" means a case in which, a police officer may, in accordance with the First Schedule or under any other law for the time being in force, arrest without warrant.
(1)(o) "non-cognizable offence" means an offence for which, and "non-cognizable case" means a case in which, a police officer has no authority to arrest without warrant.
(1)(l) "electronic communication" means the communication of any request, message, information, file, image or audio video by electrical, wire, wireless, optical or other electromagnetic systems.
(1)(n) "investigation" includes all proceedings under this Sanhita for collection of evidence conducted by a police officer or by any person authorized by a Magistrate.

CHAPTER V: ARREST OF PERSONS
Section 35. When police may arrest without warrant. (Equivalent to Section 41 CrPC).
(1) Any police officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable offence.
(2) For offences punishable with imprisonment up to seven years:
    (a) Police must satisfy conditions regarding necessity of arrest (prevent further offence, proper investigation, prevent evidence tampering);
    (b) Police officer shall record reasons in writing for making or not making the arrest;
    (c) Notice of appearance under Section 35(3) shall be issued to person where arrest is not required.
(3) No arrest shall be made without prior permission of an officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police for offences punishable with less than three years if the person is infirm or above sixty years of age.

Section 37. Designated Police Officer in every District.
A police officer not below the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector shall be designated in every police station and district to maintain information of all arrested persons displayed prominently in physical and digital format.

Section 43. Health and safety of arrested person.
Every arrested person shall be subjected to medical examination immediately after arrest by a medical officer in the service of Central or State Government.

Section 58. Person arrested not to be detained more than twenty-four hours. (Equivalent to Section 57 CrPC).
No police officer shall detain in custody a person arrested without warrant for a longer period than under all the circumstances of the case is reasonable, and such period shall not, in the absence of a special order of a Magistrate under section 187, exceed twenty-four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate's Court.

CHAPTER XII: INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGATE (FIR & ZERO FIR)
Section 173. Information in cognizable cases (FIR and Zero FIR). (Equivalent to Section 154 CrPC).
(1) Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, irrespective of the area where the offence is committed, may be given orally or by electronic communication to an officer in charge of a police station.
(a) ZERO FIR: If the information is given to a police station which does not have territorial jurisdiction over the place of offence, it shall register a "Zero FIR" and transfer the same within twenty-four hours to the police station having territorial jurisdiction.
(b) ELECTRONIC FIR (e-FIR): Information given by electronic communication shall be taken on record on being signed within three days by the person giving it.
(c) A copy of the FIR shall be given forthwith, free of cost, to the informant or the victim.
(3) PRELIMINARY ENQUIRY: In offences punishable between 3 to 7 years, the officer in charge of a police station may, with the prior permission from an officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police, conduct a preliminary enquiry within fourteen days before registering an FIR to ascertain whether a prima facie case exists.

Section 176. Procedure for investigation and Custodial Death Inquiries. (Equivalent to Section 176 CrPC).
(1) When any person dies while in the custody of the police or in any other custody, the inquiry shall be held by the Judicial Magistrate or the Metropolitan Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed.
(2) The Judicial Magistrate holding such inquiry shall record the evidence and send the body for examination to the nearest Civil Surgeon with mandatory videography of the post-mortem examination.
(3) The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) must be informed within 24 hours of any custodial death.

Section 176(3). Forensic Investigation Mandatory.
On information of an offence punishable with imprisonment of seven years or more, the officer in charge of a police station shall cause the forensic expert to visit the crime scene, collect forensic evidence, and cause videography of the crime scene.

Section 183. Recording of confessions and statements. (Equivalent to Section 164 CrPC).
(1) Any Judicial Magistrate may record any statement or confession made to him in the course of an investigation.
(2) Statements of victims of sexual offences under Sections 64 to 71 BNS shall be recorded by a woman Judicial Magistrate, and recorded through audio-video electronic means.

Section 187. Custody during investigation. (Equivalent to Section 167 CrPC).
(1) The Magistrate may authorize detention of the accused in police custody for a term not exceeding fifteen days in the whole, or in parts, at any time during the initial forty days (out of sixty days total) or sixty days (out of ninety days total).
(2) Total investigation period: 60 days for offences punishable with less than 10 years, 90 days for offences punishable with death, life imprisonment, or imprisonment of not less than 10 years.
(3) On expiry of 60/90 days, if investigation is not complete, the accused is entitled to Default Bail (Statutory Bail).

CHAPTER XXXIII: PROVISIONS AS TO BAIL AND BONDS
Section 479. Maximum period for which an undertrial prisoner can be detained (Default / Undertrial Bail). (Equivalent to Section 436A CrPC).
(1) Where a person has, during the period of investigation, inquiry or trial, undergone detention for a period extending up to one-half of the maximum period of imprisonment specified for that offence, he shall be released by the Court on bail on his personal bond with or without sureties.
(2) FIRST-TIME OFFENDER CONCESSION: Where the person is a first-time offender (never convicted of any offence in the past), he shall be released on bail if he has undergone detention for ONE-THIRD of the maximum period of imprisonment.
(3) Section 479 does not apply to offences for which the punishment of death or life imprisonment is specified.

Section 480. When bail may be taken in case of non-bailable offence. (Equivalent to Section 437 CrPC).
Bail may be granted by Magistrate in non-bailable cases unless there are reasonable grounds for believing that the person has been guilty of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life, with exceptions for persons under 16 years, women, sick or infirm persons.

Section 482. Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest (Anticipatory Bail). (Equivalent to Section 438 CrPC).
When any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section that in the event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail.

Section 483. Special powers of High Court or Court of Session regarding bail. (Equivalent to Section 439 CrPC).
The High Court or Court of Session may direct that any person accused of an offence and in custody be released on bail.

CHAPTER XXXVI: INHERENT POWERS OF HIGH COURT
Section 528. Saving of inherent powers of High Court. (Equivalent to Section 482 CrPC).
Nothing in this Sanhita shall be deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers of the High Court to make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to any order under this Sanhita, or to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. High Court has the power to quash an FIR, chargesheet, or criminal proceedings under this section.
