DOCUMENT: Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (Act No. 45 of 2023)
ACT NAME: Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (BNS)
CATEGORY: criminal_law
JURISDICTION: India
YEAR: 2023

CHAPTER I: PRELIMINARY
Section 1. Short title, commencement and application.
(1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of July, 2024.
(3) Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Sanhita and not otherwise for every act or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he shall be guilty within India.

Section 2. Definitions.
In this Sanhita, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) "act" denotes as well a series of acts as a single act;
(2) "child" means any person below the age of eighteen years;
(3) "community service" means the work which the Court may order a convict to perform as a form of punishment that benefits the community, for which he shall not be entitled to any remuneration;
(4) "document" means any matter expressed or described upon any substance by means of letters, figures or marks, or by more than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may be used, as evidence of that matter, and includes electronic and digital records;
(5) "fraudulently" means doing anything with intent to defraud but not otherwise;
(6) "good faith": Nothing is said to be done or believed in "good faith" which is done or believed without due care and attention;
(7) "injury" denotes any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in body, mind, reputation or property.

CHAPTER II: OF PUNISHMENTS
Section 4. Punishments.
The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of this Sanhita are—
(a) Death;
(b) Imprisonment for life (which means imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life);
(c) Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, namely:—
    (i) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour;
    (ii) Simple;
(d) Forfeiture of property;
(e) Fine;
(f) Community service. (New punishment introduced in BNS 2023 for petty offences like defamation, small theft, public intoxication).

CHAPTER V: OF OFFENCES AGAINST WOMAN AND CHILD
Section 63. Rape.
A man is said to commit "rape" if he penetrates his penis, or inserts any object, into the vagina, urethra, anus, or mouth of a woman against her will, without consent, or with consent obtained under fear of death/hurt or false promise of marriage.
Section 64. Punishment for rape.
Whoever commits rape shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 69. Sexual intercourse by employing deceitful means, etc.
Whoever, by deceitful means or by making promise to marry a woman without any intention of fulfilling the same, has sexual intercourse with her, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation: "deceitful means" shall include the false promise of employment or promotion, or marrying after suppressing identity.

Section 74. Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty.
Punished with imprisonment of not less than one year but which may extend to five years, and with fine. (Equivalent to Section 354 IPC).

Section 77. Voyeurism.
Any man who watches, or captures the image of a woman engaging in a private act in circumstances where she would usually expect not to be observed, shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of not less than one year but which may extend to three years, and with fine, and on second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of not less than three years but which may extend to seven years, and with fine. (Equivalent to Section 354C IPC).

Section 78. Stalking.
Punished on first conviction with imprisonment up to three years, and fine; second conviction up to five years and fine. (Equivalent to Section 354D IPC).

Section 85. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine. (Equivalent to Section 498A IPC).

Section 86. Cruelty defined.
For the purposes of section 85, "cruelty" means—
(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health; or
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security.

CHAPTER VI: OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY (HOMICIDE & MURDER)
Section 100. Culpable homicide.
Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide. (Equivalent to Section 299 IPC).

Section 101. Murder.
Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder, if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or if it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused, or if the act is done with the knowledge that it is so imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause death. (Equivalent to Section 300 IPC).

Section 103. Punishment for murder.
(1) Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. (Equivalent to Section 302 IPC).
(2) When a group of five or more persons acting in concert commits murder on the ground of race, caste or community, sex, place of birth, language, personal belief or any other similar ground, each member of such group shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. (New provision: Landmark punishment for mob lynching and hate crimes).

Section 105. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. (Equivalent to Section 304 IPC).

Section 106. Causing death by negligence (Hit and Run).
(1) Whoever causes the death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever causes the death of any person by rash and negligent driving of vehicle not amounting to culpable homicide, and escapes without reporting it to a police officer or a Magistrate soon after the incident, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description of a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. (New aggravated Hit-and-Run provision).

Section 109. Organized crime.
(1) Any continuing unlawful activity including kidnapping, robbery, vehicle theft, extortion, land grabbing, contract killing, economic offence, cyber-crimes, trafficking of persons, drugs or weapons, done by any person either as a member of an organized crime syndicate or on behalf of such syndicate.
Punishment for Organized Crime:
(a) If such offence has resulted in the death of any person, be punished with death or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees;
(b) In any other case, be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever conspires or attempts to commit, or advocates, abets or knowingly facilitates organized crime shall be punished with imprisonment of not less than five years extending to life, and fine not less than five lakh rupees. (Brand new offence in BNS).

Section 111. Terrorist act.
(1) Whoever does any act with the intent to threaten or likely to threaten the unity, integrity, sovereignty, security, or economic security of India, or with the intent to strike terror in the people or any section of the people in India or in any foreign country.
Punishment:
(a) If resulting in death of any person → Death or imprisonment for life, and fine not less than ten lakh rupees.
(b) In other cases → Imprisonment of not less than five years extending to life, and fine not less than five lakh rupees. (Incorporates anti-terror provisions into general criminal law).

Section 112. Petty organized crime.
Whoever, being a member of a group or gang, commits theft, snatching, cheating, ticket unauthorized selling, betting or gambling, shall be punished with imprisonment of not less than one year extending to seven years, and with fine.

Section 115. Voluntarily causing hurt.
Punished with imprisonment up to one year, or fine up to ten thousand rupees, or both. (Equivalent to Section 323 IPC).
Section 117. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt.
Punished with imprisonment up to seven years, and fine. (Equivalent to Section 325 IPC).

Section 152. Act endangering sovereignty, unity and integrity of India (Replacing Sedition).
Whoever, purposely or knowingly, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible representation, or by electronic communication or by use of financial means, or otherwise, excites or attempts to excite, secession or armed rebellion or subversive activities, or encourages feelings of separatist activities or endangers sovereignty or unity and integrity of India; or indulges in or commits any such act shall be punished with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. (Replaced Section 124A IPC Sedition).

CHAPTER XVII: OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section 303. Theft.
Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable property out of the possession of any person without that person's consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to commit theft.
Section 303(2). Punishment for theft: Imprisonment up to three years, or fine, or both, or in case of theft where the value of stolen property is less than five thousand rupees, and the person is convicted for the first time, with community service. (Equivalent to Section 379 IPC with new community service alternative).

Section 316. Criminal breach of trust.
Punished with imprisonment up to five years, or fine, or both. (Equivalent to Section 406 IPC).

Section 318. Cheating.
Punished with imprisonment up to three years, or fine, or both. (Equivalent to Section 420 IPC / 417 IPC).
Section 318(4). Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property: Imprisonment up to seven years, and fine. (Equivalent to Section 420 IPC).

Section 351. Criminal intimidation.
Punished with imprisonment up to two years, or fine, or both. (Equivalent to Section 506 IPC).

Section 356. Defamation.
Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm the reputation of such person, is said to defame that person.
Punishment: Simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both, or with community service. (Equivalent to Section 500 IPC).
